Speech at the University of Capetown (South Africa)
On the occasion of the "Day of Affirmation," June 6, 1966
For two centuries, my country has fought to overcome the self-imposed handicap of prejudice and discrimination based on nationality, social class, race – discrimination that is deeply repugnant to the theory and precepts of our Constitution. Even in my father's time, who grew up in Boston, Massachusetts, there were signs that said "No Irish Need Apply." Two generations later, President Kennedy became the first Irish Catholic, and the first Catholic, to lead the nation; but how many capable men, before 1961, were denied the opportunity to contribute to the nation's progress because they were Catholic or because they were of Irish origin? How many children of Italians or Jews or Poles slept in degraded neighborhoods – not educated, not instructed, their potential for our nation and for the human race lost forever? Even today, what price will we pay before we can ensure full opportunities for millions of Black Americans?
In the last five years, we have done much more to ensure equality for our Black citizens and to help the indigent, both white and black, than in the last hundred years. But much, much more remains to be done. There are millions of Blacks not trained for the simplest jobs, and thousands are deprived daily of the totality and equality of their civil rights before the law; and the violence of the disinherited, the insulted, and the injured, looms in the streets of Harlem and in those of Watts and Chicago's Southside.
But at the same time, a Black American is training now as an astronaut, one of the first explorers of space; another is the head of the government's lawyers in the United States, and dozens sit on the benches of our courts; and another, Dr. Martin Luther King, is the second man of African origin to win the Nobel Peace Prize for his non-violent campaigns for social justice among all races.
We have passed laws that prohibit discrimination in education, employment, and housing; but these laws alone cannot overcome the legacy of hundreds of years of broken families and stunted children, of poverty, degradation, and pain. So the path to equality of freedom is not easy, and there are still great efforts and dangers that each of us will have to face on our own path. We are committed to peaceful and non-violent change, and it is important that everyone understands this – even if the change is disturbing. Yet, even in the turbulence of protests and struggle, there is greater hope for the future, as men learn to claim and achieve for themselves the rights that were previously claimed by others.
And most importantly of all, the entire display of government force has been dedicated to the goal of equality before the law, as we are now committed to achieving, in fact, equal opportunities. We must recognize the absolute equality of all people: before God, before the law, and in the government of public affairs. We must do this not because it is economically advantageous, however much it is; not because God's and man's laws want it so, although they impose it; not because peoples from distant lands want it so. We must do it for one fundamental reason: because it is the right thing to do.