Speech in New York
February 7, 1966
We are facing a new crossroads toward an uncertain future. The road ahead is not yet mapped. We only know that it will be full of difficulties and pitfalls.
It may seem strange to speak at this moment of new crossroads and new turns. After all, we are in the midst of the longest period of sustained expansion in our history. Our power and wealth have never been so great. Our boys are largely going to college, and many of today's high school students are even learning as much as certain university students of yesterday. Daily, there are travelers at the frontiers of science who return with news of new possibilities, new prospects, new opportunities for us and our children. And after the 1964 elections, the federal government has fulfilled old dreams by the dozen: Medicare [The health insurance system], education incentives, voting rights, immigration reform. The legacy of the New Deal is complete.
There is not a problem for which there is no program. There is not a problem for which money is not being spent. There is not a problem or program on which dozens or hundreds or thousands of bureaucrats are not fervently at work.
But does all this represent the solution to our problems? Clearly not. We have spent ever-increasing sums on our schools. Yet too many youngsters still graduate totally devoid of the tools to help themselves, their families, or the communities in which they live. We have spent unprecedented sums on buildings of all kinds. Yet our communities appear year by year less beautiful and rational. We have spent billions to support agricultural prices. Yet the rural economy continues to decline, and more and more people leave the countryside to live in urban centers. We have spent billions on armaments and foreign aid. Nevertheless, the world is still dangerous, and our position becomes increasingly precarious and difficult as time passes.
What is the reason for all this? We have always known the answer, even if sometimes we have forgotten it. Money in itself is not a solution. [...] There are things more important than spending. They are called imagination, courage, and determination. And for those of us who speak to the public, to our fellow citizens, a fourth special requirement is necessary: sincerity. A few examples will help clarify the issue.
One is welfare. Opponents of welfare have always said that it is degrading, both for the taxpayer and for those who benefit from it. They have said that it destroys self-respect, that it discourages, that it is contrary to American ideals. Many of us have deprecated and despised these criticisms. People needed welfare, and obviously, we felt that helping people in difficulty was the right thing to do. But in our impulse to help, we lost sight of an elementary fact. Indeed, criticisms of welfare have a core of truth, and they are confirmed by evidence. Recent studies have shown, for example, that higher welfare contributions have often encouraged students to drop out of school, have pushed families to disintegrate, and have often led to a condition of lifelong dependency.
Cecil Moore, head of the NAACP in Philadelphia [the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], once said that welfare was the worst thing that could happen to a black person. Even for an extreme position like this, there is factual support. Many of us, because we were engaged in doing something we believed was right, ignored the criticisms. But consequently, they also ignored the real demand, which was and remains a decent and dignified job for all. [...] Another example: we have operated our schools based on the theory that the school system itself was good; if a boy failed, it was the boy who was wrong. And on this basis, we have labeled the boys who have encountered school failure: we have defined them as culturally disadvantaged, or retarded, or lazy, or stupid. But the results of this system are that from a quarter to a third of our young people do not even meet the minimum intellectual requirements for the Armed Forces; that more than half of the graduates of many of our high schools are not prepared even for the most rudimentary jobs; that hundreds of thousands of young people lose their way. We can no longer afford this waste. If our current educational methods fail to do better, then they must be changed to adapt to the students, just as doctors change a therapy that fails to cure a patient. We must look at a student's failure as the failure of the school and our failure. We must hold ourselves responsible for the shortcomings of our children. [...]
There is no issue that does not require the same new way of thinking, the same willingness to dare. [...] We have committed our surplus food to feed the hungry abroad and have offered our help to curb population growth; but will we be ready to commit ourselves to the extent necessary to avoid the mass starvation that our current level of effort cannot prevent? We have abandoned isolationism and intervened in every corner of the world; but will we be equally ready to abandon the status quo and join the nascent forces of revolution in Latin America, Africa, and Asia? [...] Lincoln said it best: "We must think anew and act anew. We must emancipate ourselves." To say it, however, is not to do it. It is not easy, in the middle of a person's life, or their political career, to say that the old horizons are too limited, that our educational system must start anew, that new visions must replace the old ones if we want our vitality to be preserved and renewed. Yet we must be determined to do so.