Speech to the Senate
October 3, 1966
This week America must measure itself against its dream, the dream of a nation that promises everyone the opportunity to share the rights, privileges, and duties of democracy. It is not the first test and it will not be the last.
The Economic Opportunity Act that launches the war on poverty is not perfect. Neither its presenters nor its most ardent supporters believe that the text of the law cannot be significantly improved. On the other hand, it is not even the only government program that intends to respond to the needs of the poor. But the war on poverty is, in its way, an unprecedented initiative. Like it or not, the war on poverty represents the nation's acceptance of the principle that poverty must be eliminated. It is not just about giving a job to unemployed fathers, education to children, and medical care to mothers, even though obviously the war on poverty is all these things. The war on poverty represents the acceptance of the principle that every American must have the same opportunities for a peaceful life for themselves and their children, the same opportunities to participate in the government of the city, the state, and the country, the same opportunities to take part in the great initiatives of American public life. Long ago, John Adams pointed out the ideals to which this proposal is inspired: "The poor man has a clean conscience – he wrote – yet he is ashamed." He gropes in the dark, feeling distant from others. Humanity does not seem to notice him. He wanders aimlessly, unobserved; in the crowd, in church, at the market, he is shrouded in darkness as if he were in an attic or a cell. He is not subject to disapproval, censure, or blame; he is simply invisible. Being ignored and knowing it is intolerable. This bill constitutes the public declaration that America's poor are not ignored, are not forgotten, that we want to see them, hear them, help them in a spirit of collaboration to become active and productive citizens and not passive beneficiaries of the crumbs that fall from the table of the rich.