Speech at the University of Kansas
March 18, 1968
There are millions of people living in hidden places, whose names and faces are completely unknown. But I have seen these other Americans, I have seen the hungry children in Mississippi, with their bodies so ravaged by hunger and their minds so damaged for life as to have no future. I have seen these children in Mississippi, here in the United States, a country with a gross domestic product of 800 billion dollars; I have seen children in the Mississippi Delta region with swollen bellies and faces covered with sores from starvation; and we have not yet developed a policy that allows us to provide the necessary food so that they can live and so that their lives are not destroyed. I do not believe this is acceptable in the United States of America. I think there is a need for change.
I have seen Indians living on their bare and miserable reservations, without work, with 80% unemployment and with so little hope for the future among the young, boys and girls under twenty, that the main cause of death among them is suicide. That these, the first Americans, this minority, here in the United States, end their lives by killing themselves, I do not think is acceptable on our part. That there are boys and girls who, while attending high school and feeling that their lives are hopeless, that no one will take care of them, that no one will commit to them, and that no one will trouble themselves for them, are so full of despair as to hang themselves, shoot themselves, and kill themselves, I do not think is acceptable, and I believe that the United States of America and the American people, all of us, can do much, much more. And I am running for this reason; I am running for the presidency because I have seen proud men on the hills of Appalachia, men who simply wish to work with dignity, but cannot, because the mines have been closed, their work is gone, and no one, neither industry, nor the union, nor the government, has cared enough to help them. I think that we, in this country, with the generous spirit that exists here in the United States, can do better.
I have seen the people of the black ghetto listen to ever-greater promises of equality and justice, while in reality they still sit in the same dilapidated schools and crowd into the same dirty rooms, without heating, defending themselves from the cold and from rats. If we believe that we, as Americans, are bound together by a common concern for each other, then an urgent national priority looms. We must begin to end the shame of this other America. And this is for us, as individuals and as citizens, one of the great tasks to be assigned this year to leadership. But even as we commit ourselves to erasing material poverty, we have another, even greater task, which is to confront the poverty of satisfaction – in purpose and dignity – that afflicts us all.
With too much insistence and for too long, it seems that we have given up on personal excellence and community values in favor of the mere accumulation of worldly goods. Our GDP has exceeded 800 billion dollars a year, but that GDP – if we judge the USA based on it – also includes air pollution, cigarette advertising, and ambulances to clear our highways of weekend carnage. The GDP takes into account the special locks for our house doors and the prisons for those who try to force them open. It includes Whitman's rifle and Speck's knife, and the television programs that exalt violence in order to sell toys to our children. It grows with the production of napalm, missiles, and nuclear warheads and only increases when the popular slums are rebuilt on their ashes. It includes the police's armored cars to face urban riots. The GDP does not take into account the health of our families, the quality of their education, or the joy of their leisure moments. It does not include the beauty of our poetry, the solidity of family values, or the intelligence of our debate. The GDP does not measure our wit, our courage, our wisdom, our knowledge, our compassion, or our devotion to our country. It measures everything, in short, except what makes life truly worth living. It can tell us everything about America, but not whether we can be proud of being Americans.