Speech in Honor of Martin Luther King
Indianapolis, April 4, 1968
Ladies and gentlemen, tonight I am here to speak for just a couple of minutes. Because [...] I have very sad news for you, and I believe sad news for all our American fellow citizens, and for those who love peace around the world.
Martin Luther King dedicated his life to the cause of love and justice for all human beings, and he died precisely because of this commitment. In this difficult moment for the United States, perhaps we should ask ourselves what kind of nation we represent and what our objectives are.
There can certainly be bitterness, hatred, and desire for revenge among the people of color who are among you, given the evidence that there are whites among those responsible for the assassination.
We can choose to move in this direction as a nation, in further polarization, dividing ourselves blacks with blacks, whites with whites, full of hatred for each other. Or we can instead make an effort to understand, as Martin Luther King did, and replace this violence, this bloodstain that has spread throughout the country, with an attempt to understand through compassion and love.
To those of you who are tempted to give in to hatred and distrust toward whites for the injustice of what happened, I can only say that I feel the same feelings deep in my heart. I too have had someone in my family killed, albeit by a white man like him.
But we must make an effort in the United States, we must make an effort to understand, to overcome these difficult moments.
My favorite poet is Aeschylus. He wrote: "Even as we sleep, pain that cannot forget falls drop by drop upon the heart until, in our despair and even against our will, wisdom comes through the grace of God."
We certainly do not need divisions in the United States, we do not need hatred, or violence or anarchy. Instead, we need love and wisdom, compassion for one another, and a sense of justice for all those who still suffer in our country, be they white or black.
This evening I therefore ask you to return to your homes and say a prayer for Martin Luther King's family. But, more importantly, I ask you to say a prayer for our country that we all love, a prayer that we may feel that love and compassion I was talking about earlier. We can do much in our country. There will undoubtedly be difficult times. We have had them in the past and we will surely have them in the future. We are not yet, unfortunately, at the end of violence, anarchy, and disorder.
But the vast majority of whites and blacks in this country want to improve the quality of our lives and want justice for all human beings living in our land.
Let us dedicate ourselves to pursuing what the Greeks wrote so many years ago: to tame the savage nature of man and make life gentle in this world of ours. Let us dedicate ourselves to this, and let us all say a prayer for our country and for our people. Thank you.