The Enemy Within
Excerpt from the book "The Enemy Within," Harper and Brothers, New York 1960, pp.306-307
More than twenty people, union leaders, management personnel, gangsters and others directly involved in the investigations have been arrested and sentenced to prison terms as a result of the work of these men [...]. There is enormous satisfaction obviously in the fact that Congress has passed a law to address the crimes we have discovered [...].
The sordid dishonesty discovered by the McClellan Committee affects all Americans, as it impacts every sector of our economic life (labor, administration, law, press). The new labor law is a prelude to a great step forward, but it cannot be considered a final achievement; we cannot afford to be content with the work done so far.
What was discovered by the McClellan Committee was, in my opinion, only a symptom of a more serious moral disease [...]. For our nation to endure in a period of increased international competition, we must reaffirm some fundamental values of our ancestors, values that are deeply rooted in the history of our country and in its growth to a position of strength and consideration in the community of nations. The tyrant, the bully, the corrupter and the corrupted are shameful figures. Union leaders who have become thieves, who have defrauded those who had given them trust, have dishonored a vital and largely honest movement. Businessmen who have yielded to the temptation to negotiate for advantages over their competitors have altered the moral conception of the free American economic system.
Neither the labor movement nor our economic system can tolerate this paralyzing corruption. Premier Khrushchev has said that we are a dying country, a decadent society. The fact that he says so doesn't make it true. But there is no doubt that corruption, dishonesty, and weaknesses, both physical and moral, have become widespread in this country. [...] To meet the challenge of our times, so that we can later look at this period not as something to be ashamed of, but as a turning point on the road to improving America, we must first defeat the enemy within.